In this section, we'll go over another privacy technique known as differential privacy.
We'll focus on what it is,
who is using it, how it works,
and what the future for this technique is.
Companies want access to our data to help
improve performance and usability of their products.
On the other hand, as users of these products we expect
privacy and don't want companies to be able to track the things we do.
This is a problem that many companies face and it could be
solved using a technique known as differential privacy.
Differential privacy is a technique used to maximize both the usefulness of
a set of data as well as the privacy of the individuals within the dataset.
It allows us to gain important insights about a group whose data has been
collected without revealing the details about specific members of that group.
This is important for a few reasons.
To learn why, let's go over a few examples of how
centralized companies use this including Google Maps,
iPhone keyboard, and Google Chrome.
The common theme between each of these examples is that companies want to learn
general patterns of behavior from
its users without being able to trace data to a single user.
Afterwards, we'll go over how this could be transferred to a decentralized environment.
Google Maps allows you to search any location in
the world and helps you navigate using GPS.
By using GPS and Google Maps,
you're creating a lot of data about all the places you travel,
but you wouldn't want Google to be able to look into this data to
study your specific individual traveling habits.
On the other hand, Google can use this data to improve
its service as important that they have some kind of access to it.
Using differential privacy, the data they collect can't be traced back to you
specifically but can be aggregated into
a larger collection of data to analyze the general habits of all of its users.
This allows them to do things like analyse traffic patterns based on the time of day.
The same ideas are used by other Google products like Google Chrome.
For example, they could analyse trends of web browsing behavior
without being able to access your specific personal search history.
Other companies have taken the step to ensure privacy.
One example is the Apple iPhone keyboard.
By using the keyboard again,
you're generating a lot of private data that could be traced back to you.
But Apple can use this data in its applications for things like
determining which word uses a typing that aren't currently in their dictionary.
Reading of messages word for word would definitely be an invasion of your privacy.
So, Apple has taken steps to ensure that this doesn't happen using differential privacy.
As a side note, you might be thinking,
can't we just anonymize the dataset by
removing our names and other identifying information.
As it turns out, this approach can be less effective than it seems.
For one, anonymous data is often either not actually anonymous or not that valuable.
Using techniques like linkage attacks,
data analysts can actually use the data from various sources to
infer the identity of users within a set of anonymous data,
and they can get extremely accurate results about which data came from you.
On the other end of the spectrum,
if you were just strip the data of
all the qualities needed to be truly completely anonymous,
you'd likely end up with a dataset that you can't derive any valuable insights from.
For these reasons, anonymizing or de-identifying data is not always an option,
that brings us back to the importance of differential privacy.
So, how is this any different?
How does it help to gain insights without intruding into users privacy?
Well, to do this, the companies collecting data apply
differential privacy techniques such as random noise to the data they're collecting.
Rather than get the fully accurate data about each individual user,
the companies receive information that can't
be traced back to the user they are collected from.
Here's an example using a simple survey.
Let's say we asked you and 1,000 other people if they enjoy their current job,
and we allow them to answer yes or no to the question.
Using differential privacy, we can't just collect each of these answers.
We have to use an algorithm that introduces some noise to the answers.
Here's a simple example.
To start, the algorithm takes your answer and flips a coin.
If the coin flip is heads,
your real answer is sent through,
if the coin flip is tails,
the algorithm will send a random answer derived from flipping coin a second time.
Using the second flip,
the algorithm will send yes if it flips heads and no if it flips tails.
When we look at the data,
the noise we've introduced makes it impossible for
us to fully trust the data for any specific user,
that is, each user now has plausible deniability.
So, when looking at one user's data,
there's a 50 percent chance that the answer is based on that user's true response,
and a 50 percent chance that answer is based on a random coin flip.
Also, since the data analyst knows how much of the data is due to this random noise,
they can compensate for it and extrapolate
an accurate view of the population of people who responded to their server.
This example is simple compared to the types of
distributions and randomization that happen in real differential privacy.
But this basic idea still holds true.
There are many benefits of differential privacy,
but there are some complications too.
For one, the noise introduced in the dataset requires
the dataset to be large in order to compensate for the misinformation within it.
It's also a bit more difficult to implement because of
the extra steps involved to ensure that protected answers don't leak out somehow.
That said, privacy is important and this effort continues
to move forward in both centralized and decentralized applications.
It's a privacy technique that allows data analysts to gain insights from
information all while allowing the information of an individual user to stay private.
It does this by injecting random noise into the dataset.
This practice is already in widespread use by companies like Google and Apple to protect
users data and continues to gain more adoption including within the blockchain space.